<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The baptismal entry, with its numerous signatures, is shown to visitors, and a tablet in the baptistry of the beautiful Gothic church tells the pilgrim that here the “Little Queen” was made a child of God. [<abbr>Ed.</abbr>] <a href="prologue.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><cite><em>“As Little Children”</em>: the abridged life of Soeur Thérèse.</cite> Published at the Orphans’ Press, Rochdale. <a href="prologue.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>
						<cite>Francis Thompson.</cite><a href="prologue.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Ps.</abbr> 88[89]:1. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This statue twice appeared as if endowed with life, in order to enlighten and console <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Martin, mother of Thérèse. A like favour was granted to Thérèse herself, as will be seen in the course of the narrative. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mark 3:13. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Cf.</abbr> Exodus 33:19. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Cf.</abbr> <abbr>Rom.</abbr> 9:16. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Cf.</abbr> <abbr>Ps.</abbr> 22[23]:1⁠–⁠4. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Ps.</abbr> 102[103]:8. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The custom still prevails in some parts of France of blessing bread at the Offertory of the Mass and then distributing it to the faithful. It is known as <i xml:lang="fr">pain bénit</i>. This blessing only takes place at the Parochial Mass. [<abbr>Ed.</abbr>] <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This holy nun had been professed at the Carmel of <span xml:lang="fr">Poitiers</span>, and was sent from there to make the foundation at <span xml:lang="fr">Lisieux</span> in 1838. Her memory is held in benediction in both these convents; in the sight of God she constantly practised the most heroic virtue, and on December 5, 1891, crowned a life of good works by a holy death. She was then eighty-six years of age. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This house, an object of deep interest to the clients of Soeur Thérèse, is much frequented by pilgrims to <span xml:lang="fr">Lisieux</span>. [<abbr>Ed.</abbr>]<a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This first confession was made in the beautiful church of <abbr>St.</abbr> Pierre, formerly the cathedral of <span xml:lang="fr">Lisieux</span>. [<abbr>Ed.</abbr>]<a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It seems advisable, on account of the vague allusions which occur here and elsewhere, to state what happened to M. Louis Martin. At the age of sixty-six, having already had several partial attacks, he was struck with general paralysis, and his mind gave way altogether.<a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Marie Guérin entered the Carmel at Lisieux on August 15, 1895, and took the name of Sister Mary of the Eucharist. She died on April 14, 1905, aged thirty-four. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>With the Carmelites the grating is only opened for near relatives and very young children. [<abbr>Ed.</abbr>]<a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Pauline” has several times been Prioress of the Carmel of Lisieux, and in 1909 again succeeded to that office on the death of the young and saintly Mother Mary of <abbr>St.</abbr> Angelus of the Child Jesus. [<abbr>Ed.</abbr>]<a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>John 11:4. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Mme.</abbr> Guérin died holily on February 13, 1900, aged fifty-two. During her illness Thérèse assisted her in an extraordinary way, several times making her presence felt. Monsieur Guérin, having for many years used his pen in defence of the Church, and his fortune in the support of good works, died a beautiful death on September 28, 1909, in his sixty-ninth year. [<abbr>Ed.</abbr>]<a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It was in this small church⁠—once deserted and to-day perhaps the most frequented in Paris⁠—that the saintly Abbé Desgenettes was inspired by Our Lady, in 1836, to establish the Confraternity of the Immaculate Heart of Mary for the conversion of sinners. [<abbr>Ed.</abbr>]<a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cant. 2:11. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
